_research-areas/research-areas-1.md, before:

---
layout: single
title: "Data Visualization of Satellite Constellations"
excerpt: "Data visualization of resident space objects across time-scales is one of the specialities of the group. <br/><img src='/images/ow_constellation_animation_oneweb.gif' width='650'>"
collection: project
author_profile: true
share: true
--- 

As part of my PhD I am working on improving orbit solutions for space traffic management operations using a number of techniques. The first step in this process has been identifying the limitations of current orbital solutions in Space Situational Awareness. This has involved analyzing the accuracy of the current state-of-the-art in both uncooperative and cooperative SSA. The results of this analysis are presented in the paper "On the Limits of Current Practices in Uncooperative Space Surveillance: Analysis of Mega-Constellation Data Time-Series" which I will present at the 2023 AMOS conference.

Time evolution of positional discrepancy between NORAD TLEs, Supplemental TLEs (Celestrak) and Operator Ephemeris Data (GNSS). The horizontal dotted lines represent a new TLE updating the state vector that is being propagated using SGP4. <br/><img src='/images/SUPvsGPvsOp_06022023.png' width='800'>"

Commit message:

fix page one research area

_research-areas/research-areas-1.md, after:

---
layout: single
title: "Identifying the limitations of current orbital solutions in Space Situational Awareness"
excerpt: "Argument of Latitude at which TLEs are produced for the two largest constellations based on TLE source.<br/><img src='/images/animated_polar_histogram.gif' width='350'>"
collection: research-areas
author_profile: true
share: true
---

As part of my PhD I am working on improving orbit solutions for space traffic management operations using a number of techniques. The first step in this process has been identifying the limitations of current orbital solutions in Space Situational Awareness. This has involved analyzing the accuracy of the current state-of-the-art in both uncooperative and cooperative SSA. The results of this analysis are presented in the paper "On the Limits of Current Practices in Uncooperative Space Surveillance: Analysis of Mega-Constellation Data Time-Series" which I will present at the 2023 AMOS conference.

Time evolution of positional discrepancy between NORAD TLEs, Supplemental TLEs (Celestrak) and Operator Ephemeris Data (GNSS). The horizontal dotted lines represent a new TLE updating the state vector that is being propagated using SGP4. <br/><img src='/images/SUPvsGPvsOp_06022023.png' width='800'>"
