_research-areas/research-areas-4.md, before:

---
layout: single
title: "MSc Project: Aerodynamic Drag Modelling for LEO Mega-Constellations <br/><img src='https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CharlesPlusC/CharlesPlusC.github.io/master/images/HCL_drag_diff.png' width='450'>
collection: posts
author_profile: true
share: true
---
This research project formed the basis of a master's thesis on the impact of higher-fidelity aerodynamic drag modeling in the orbit propagation of spacecraft in low Earth orbit. The study involved developing a custom 3D aerodynamic drag model and comparing it to the widely-used SGP4 propagation. The research was conducted using a subset of the OneWeb and Starlink mega-constellations, covering around 40% of the total satellites.

The study found that there are significant differences in the ephemerides generated by propagation containing the 3D and 1D models. The 3D model corrects a secular effect that could impact the orbit propagation process on the order of tens of meters within a few hours, even at altitudes above which these effects are typically neglected. For Space Situational Awareness providers, this kind of mismodelling will impact their ability to deliver meaningful conjunction warnings to spacecraft operators in LEO. For mega-constellation operators, such effects will impact the evolution of constellation geometry which will influence their station-keeping regime. Making the required corrections has implications for the constellation lifetime and service provision as it directly impacts constellation geometry and fuel consumption.

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CharlesPlusC/CharlesPlusC.github.io/master/images/HCL_drag_diff.png" alt="Height, Cross-track and Along-track position differences caused by drag mismodelling over 12 hours. Beta prime is the angle between the sun and the spacecraft's orbital plane.">
</p>


The study highlights the benefits of using higher-fidelity aerodynamic drag models within orbit propagators and the high computational cost associated with modeling atmospheric density in the orbit propagation process. The size of uncertainties in the atmospheric density modeling problem outweighs many other aspects of the orbit propagation process.

The research concludes that current drag modeling methods used in operational systems are too coarse and contribute to the high false-positive rate of conjunction warnings. For mega-constellation operators, using higher-fidelity drag models will predict the spacecraft network geometry more accurately, impacting the scheduling of maneuvers and station-keeping.

Overall, this study contributes to improving our understanding of the impacts of higher-fidelity aerodynamic drag modeling in the orbit propagation process for spacecraft in low Earth orbit. The results show that higher physical fidelity aerodynamic drag modeling significantly impacts the accuracy of orbit propagation, emphasizing the need for continued research and development in this area to improve space traffic management and the longevity of mega-constellations. The findings of this study have important implications for the wider space community, including operators, regulators, and researchers.

Commit message:

update research areas and add a new page for re-entry

_research-areas/research-areas-4.md, after:

---
layout: single
title: "May 2024 Geomagnetic Storm Case Study"
excerpt: <br/><img src='https://github.com/CharlesPlusC/CharlesPlusC.github.io/blob/master/images/circulaplots-tsx_gfo.png?raw=true' width='350'>
collection: research-areas
author_profile: true
share: true
---

In this work, we have been investigating the response of the thermosphere during the significant Mother’s Day geomagnetic storm in May 2024. By leveraging precise orbits, I focused on inverting for thermospheric densities in near real-time.

One of the key challenges that remains in POD-density inversion is accessing precise orbits with sufficent latency, and accuracy to provide relevant densities. A standout provider is GFZ Potsdam, which makes near real-time orbits (~35mins after overhead pass) available for several LEO satellites. During the May 2024 storm, I utilized their near real-time orbit data to generate thermospheric density profiles in near real-time. The magnitude of this geomagnetic storm made this analysis especially compelling.

![tsx_gfo_orbitderiveddensities](https://github.com/CharlesPlusC/CharlesPlusC.github.io/blob/master/images/tsx_gfo_storm_plots.png?raw=true)

Expanding on this work, I incorporated additional POD data from the European Space Agency, accessed via their Copernicus data portal. This allowed me to analyze thermospheric densities at altitudes reaching up to 786 kilometers, including those for Sentinel-1 and Sentinel-2. Collaborating with other PhD students in my group and from the Atmospheric Physics Lab, we expanded our investigation beyond thermospheric profiles to include ground-based density measurements, and other kinds of indirect observations of the thermosphere.

![s1as2a_ciruclardensities](https://github.com/CharlesPlusC/CharlesPlusC.github.io/blob/master/images/s1as2a_circulardensity.png?raw=true)

The students of the Applied Physics Laboratory (Eliot Dable and Laura Aguilar), who have expertise with Fabry-Perot interferometers, contributed ground-based density measurements, along with temperature and wind observations. These measurements allowed for some cross-validation of the thermospheric response captured by the orbit-derived densities during the storm.

Moreover, we tried to make this an operationally-relevant paper by turning our attention to the decay of uncooperatively tracked objects cataloged by the Space Force. This system, though relatively coarse, still allowed us to observe the decay in semi-major axis for objects over time. One key question for both the thermosphere and space operations communities is determining the altitude at which the thermosphere stops having a significant impact during storms. By analyzing catalog-wide changes in semi-major axis, we aimed to pinpoint the altitude up to which drag effects were observable, providing valuable insights for operational models.

In a further extension of my previous work on uncooperative tracking, we compared these coarse orbits with the highly precise orbits, known to have centimeter-level accuracy. This comparison revealed a degradation in tracking accuracy during the storm’s onset, with errors reaching multi-kilometer levels. This analysis has important operational implications, as it highlights the limitations of current uncooperative tracking systems during geomagnetic storms.

Overall, this study underscores the need for improved models and tracking methods in response to geomagnetic events, which have significant operational impacts on satellite navigation, space traffic management, and atmospheric density estimation.

We will be presenting this work at the European Space Weather Week in November 2024 and submitting it to the Journal Space Weather.
