api/README.md, before:

# Satellite Pass Prediction API

This API provides accurate satellite pass predictions using the Skyfield Python library.

## Endpoint

`GET /api/satellite_passes`

## Parameters

- `lat` (float): Observer latitude in degrees (-90 to 90)
- `lon` (float): Observer longitude in degrees (-180 to 180)
- `alt` (float): Observer altitude in meters
- `days` (int, optional): Number of days to predict (default: 7)

## Example Request

```
GET /api/satellite_passes?lat=51.5074&lon=-0.1278&alt=0&days=7
```

## Response Format

```json
{
  "success": true,
  "location": {
    "lat": 51.5074,
    "lon": -0.1278,
    "alt": 0
  },
  "satellites": {
    "25338": {
      "name": "NOAA 15",
      "frequency": "137.620 MHz",
      "passes": [
        {
          "start": "2025-12-28T12:34:56Z",
          "end": "2025-12-28T12:45:12Z",
          "max_elevation": 45.2,
          "duration": 10,
          "max_elevation_time": "2025-12-28T12:40:05Z"
        }
      ]
    }
  },
  "generated_at": "2025-12-28T11:30:00Z"
}
```

## Deployment

This API is designed to run as a Vercel serverless function. It will automatically:
- Fetch fresh TLE data from Celestrak
- Calculate pass predictions using Skyfield
- Return accurate timing and elevation data

## Dependencies

- `skyfield`: Professional astronomy library for accurate satellite tracking
- `numpy`: Required by Skyfield for numerical calculations

Commit message:

Implement TLE caching to avoid overloading Celestrak API
Problem: Previous implementation fetched TLE data from Celestrak on every
user request (3 requests per page load). This could lead to rate limiting
or being blocked by Celestrak.

Solution: Automated TLE caching with GitHub Actions

GitHub Actions Workflow (.github/workflows/update-tles.yml):
- Runs every 6 hours automatically
- Fetches TLE data from Celestrak for all 3 NOAA satellites
- Commits updated data to data/tles.json
- Only 4 requests per day to Celestrak instead of per-user-request
- Can be manually triggered if needed

API Changes (api/satellite_passes.py):
- Reads TLE data from cached file (data/tles.json)
- No external HTTP calls during API requests
- Faster response times
- Falls back to error if cache file is missing

Initial Data (data/tles.json):
- Bootstrapped with current TLE data
- Contains NOAA 15, 18, and 19 orbital elements
- Includes timestamp of when data was fetched
- Will be automatically updated by GitHub Actions

Documentation:
- Updated DEPLOYMENT.md with caching explanation
- Created data/README.md explaining the cache
- Updated api/README.md to document data source
- Instructions for manual TLE updates if needed

Benefits:
- Respectful to Celestrak (minimal load)
- Faster API responses (no external calls)
- TLE updates tracked in version control
- Fully automated with no manual intervention
- 6-hour refresh is more than sufficient (orbits change slowly)

api/README.md, after:

# Satellite Pass Prediction API

This API provides accurate satellite pass predictions using the Skyfield Python library.

## Endpoint

`GET /api/satellite_passes`

## Parameters

- `lat` (float): Observer latitude in degrees (-90 to 90)
- `lon` (float): Observer longitude in degrees (-180 to 180)
- `alt` (float): Observer altitude in meters
- `days` (int, optional): Number of days to predict (default: 7)

## Example Request

```
GET /api/satellite_passes?lat=51.5074&lon=-0.1278&alt=0&days=7
```

## Response Format

```json
{
  "success": true,
  "location": {
    "lat": 51.5074,
    "lon": -0.1278,
    "alt": 0
  },
  "satellites": {
    "25338": {
      "name": "NOAA 15",
      "frequency": "137.620 MHz",
      "passes": [
        {
          "start": "2025-12-28T12:34:56Z",
          "end": "2025-12-28T12:45:12Z",
          "max_elevation": 45.2,
          "duration": 10,
          "max_elevation_time": "2025-12-28T12:40:05Z"
        }
      ]
    }
  },
  "generated_at": "2025-12-28T11:30:00Z"
}
```

## TLE Data Source

This API uses **cached TLE data** to avoid overloading Celestrak:

- TLE data is stored in `data/tles.json`
- Updated automatically every 6 hours by GitHub Actions
- API reads from cache (no external HTTP calls during requests)
- Only 4 requests per day to Celestrak instead of per-user-request

See `.github/workflows/update-tles.yml` for the update workflow.

## Deployment

This API is designed to run as a Vercel serverless function. It will automatically:
- Read cached TLE data from `data/tles.json`
- Calculate pass predictions using Skyfield
- Return accurate timing and elevation data

## Dependencies

- `skyfield`: Professional astronomy library for accurate satellite tracking
- `numpy`: Required by Skyfield for numerical calculations
